
1
Install the Python Install Manager
Find the file you downloaded (python-manager-26.3.msix), probably in your Downloads folder. Double-click it. A small window pops up — click "Install". Wait for it to finish (a few seconds), then click "Close". This step only installs a manager tool, not Python itself yet — that's next.

2
Install actual Python using the manager
Click the Windows Start menu, type "PowerShell", and open "Windows PowerShell" (NOT the blue old-style one if you see two — either works, but PowerShell is easiest). In the black/blue window that opens, type exactly: py install and press Enter. It will download and install the latest Python version — this can take 1-2 minutes. Let it finish completely until you see your cursor blinking again with no errors.

3
Verify Python is installed correctly
In that same PowerShell window, type: python --version and press Enter. You should see something like "Python 3.13.x". If instead you see a red error or "not recognized", close PowerShell completely, reopen a NEW PowerShell window (this refreshes it), and try again. Don't skip this check — if this doesn't work, nothing after it will either.

4
Open VS Code and open your energypulse folder
Open VS Code. Go to the top menu: File > Open Folder. Browse to wherever your "energypulse" folder is saved (Desktop, Downloads, etc.) and select it, then click "Select Folder". On the left side of VS Code, you should now see a panel listing: app.py, data_utils.py, features.py, models.py, requirements.txt, README.md. If you see those 6 files, you're in the right place.

5
Open a terminal INSIDE VS Code
In VS Code's top menu, click Terminal > New Terminal. A panel opens at the bottom of the VS Code window — this is a command line, similar to the PowerShell you used before, but it automatically starts inside your energypulse folder. Type: python --version and press Enter here too, just to confirm VS Code sees Python (should show the same version as step 3).

6
Create a virtual environment
In that VS Code terminal, type exactly: python -m venv venv and press Enter. Wait about 10-20 seconds. Nothing dramatic happens on screen, but afterward you'll notice a new "venv" folder appear in the file list on the left. That's a self-contained mini-Python just for this project.

7
Activate the virtual environment
In the same terminal, type: .\venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1 and press Enter. If you get a red error mentioning "execution policy" or "scripts disabled", type this first: Set-ExecutionPolicy -Scope Process -ExecutionPolicy Bypass then press Enter, type Y and press Enter if asked, then retry the Activate.ps1 command. You'll know it worked when you see (venv) appear at the very start of the line in your terminal.

8
Install the project's required packages
With (venv) showing at the start of your terminal line, type: pip install -r requirements.txt and press Enter. Lots of text will scroll by as it downloads pandas, streamlit, scikit-learn, and others. This takes 1-3 minutes. Wait until it stops scrolling and you see your cursor blinking again with no red "ERROR" text.

Step 9: Run the app
In that same VS Code terminal (with (venv) still showing at the start of the line), type:

streamlit run app.py

and press Enter.